38 Linux Commands and Utilities You CANT Live without 
This guide contains most essential Linux commands. This Guide is designed specifically for Linux Managers and system administrators.
Below are the 38 Linux Commands and Utilities:-
1.  alias
Using a shorter name instead of those name which are usually associated with such commands it is a simple way to run a command or a series of Unix commands.
2.  apt-get
A tool to automatically update a Debian Machine and install Debian programme/packages.
3.  Aspell
Designed to replace Ispell GNU Aspell is a free and open source spell checker. It can be used as a library or as an Independent spell checker.
4.  bzip2
Compressing and Decompressing is portable, fast at a high rate using bzip2
5.  cat
Displaying contents of a file is commonly used in cat. It is a Unix/Linux command which can read, modify and concatenate text files.
6.  cd
This command changes the current directory in Linux and it can switch between directories conveniently. In  MS-DOS, CD and CHDIR is similar to Cd.
7.  cmp
The basic job of cmp is to compare two files of any type and writes the result to the standard output. Reporting function acts when there is different between the byte and line.
8.  date
Date basically sets a systems date and time. It is more useful while taking output or print information when working in a script file.
9.  declare
Declare modifies properties of Variables and gives them attributes
10.  echo
It allows user to “echo” or repeat string variable to standard output.
11.  enable
It will stop or start classes or printers.
12.  exec
It replaces whatever is typed with the parent process.
13.  export
It converts a file into different format that the one in which it is currently. It can be accessed by any application that uses it format once the file is exported.
14.  find
It searched the directory tree to find particular group of files that meet specifed conditions, including name and type, –size and –exec.
15.  free
Displaying the total amount of free and used physical memory and swap space is done by Free.
16.  gzip
It is used for file compression, compressing web pages on the server. It is the GNU project’s open source program.
17.  ifconfig
It is used to configure the kernel-resident network interfaces. It is needed when debugging or when system tuning is needed.
18.  less, more
Displaying text files one screen at a time, less command lets an admin scroll through configuration and error log files.
19.  locate, slocate
It reads one or more databases and writes file names matching patterns to output.
20.  man
It is a short form of “manual”. Man allows user to display the user manual built into Linux distribution and format.
21.  neat
It helps admins to specify the information needed to set up a network card among other features.
22.  nslookup
It allows user to enter a host name and find corresponding IP address.
23.  ping
It helps user in verifying that a particular IP address exists and can accept requests.
24.  read
It is used to read lines of text from standard input and to assign values of each field in input
25.  rsync
Rsync is similar to rcp, but it has more options, it syncs data from one disk or file to another across a network connection.
26.  screen
It is a terminal multiplexer in which a user can use a single terminal window to run multiple applications or windows.
27.  sdiff
It finds differences between two files by producing a side-by-side listing indicating lines that are dissimilar.
28.  shutdown
It is command that turns off the computer and it can be combined with variables such as –h, for halt after shutdown, or -r, for reboot after shutdown.
29.  sort
It is used to sort lines of text alphabetically or numerically according to fields
30.  sudo
It allows a system admin to give certain users the ability to run some (or all) commands at the root level and logs all commands and arguments.
31.  tar
Creating archives from a number of specified files and extracting files from such an archive is easy with tar program.
32.  TOP 
Protocols for network performing distributed information processing in offices and displaying the tasks on the system that takes most memory is the function of TOP.
33.  uname
The function of uname is to display the name of the current operating system and printing information about the system.
34.  uniq
Removing or reporting duplicate lines and comparing adjacent lines in a file is the function of uniq.
35.  vi
A user can control the system by solely using the keyboard instead using a combination of mouse selection and keystrokes with vi.
36.  wc
Counting the number of words, lines and characters in text files and producing a count for multiple files is the function of wc.
37.  whoami
The function of whoami is to print or write the user login name associated with the current ID to the standard output.
38.  xargs
The Xargs builds, reads and executed arguments from standard input, in input the blank lines are ignored

